Rewrite bit-ordering page (#273)
Qiskit/documentation: docs/build/qubit-order.mdx

---

> title: Bit-ordering in Qiskit

Reviewer: We should use the same title in all three places (page title, metadata, and toc file). At the moment we have to take into consideration the unfortunate truncation that happens in the left nav (there is an issue out to fix that), so shorter might be better, at least temporarily.

description: Learn about Qiskit's ordering conventions and why we chose them
---

# Order of bits and qubits in Qiskit

If you have a set of $n$ bits (or qubits), you'll usually label each bit $0
\rightarrow n-1$. Different softwares and resources must choose how they order

> these bits both in computer memory and when displayed on screen.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
these bits both in computer memory and when displayed on-screen.
```

Here's how Qiskit orders bits in different scenarios:

- The `QuantumCircuit` class stores its qubits in a list
  (`QuantumCircuit.qubits`). The index of a qubit in this list defines the
  qubit's label.

  ```python
  from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
  qc = QuantumCircuit(2)
  qc.qubits[0]  # qubit "0"
  ```

  ```
  Qubit(QuantumRegister(2, 'q'), 0)
  ```

- On a circuit diagram, qubit $0$ is the topmost qubit, and qubit $n$ the
  bottommost qubit (you can change this default with the `reverse_bits=True`

>   argument to `QuantumCircuit.draw`; see [Changing
>   ordering](#changing-ordering)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  argument to `QuantumCircuit.draw`; see [Change
  ordering in Qiskit](#change-ordering-in-qiskit)).
```

  ```python
  qc.x(1)
  qc.draw()
  ```

  ```
  q_0: ─────
       ┌───┐
  q_1: ┤ X ├
       └───┘
  ```

- When interpreting bits as a number, bit $0$ is the least significant bit, and
  bit $n$ the most significant. This is helpful when coding because each bit

>   has the value $2^\text{label}$. For example, the following circuit execution

Reviewer: As a total noob I don't understand the 2^label part... does "label" represent the bit's position?

Reviewer: Ah, on my third reading I actually digested the part where you define "label" 😆 so I think nothing needs to change!

Author: Even if it's technically correct, do you think it could benefit from rephrasing?

Reviewer: If you wanted to help people like me who don't retain that definition half-a-page later, you could add a parenthetical:
 

> 2^label (`label` being the qubit's index in the list).

Author: Will do, thanks! (And thanks for the review)

  ends with bit $0$ being `0`, and bit $1$ being `1`. This is interpreted as
  the decimal integer `2` (measured with probability `1.0`).
  
  ```python
  from qiskit.primitives import Sampler
  qc.measure_all()
  Sampler().run(qc).result().quasi_dists[0]
  ```

  ```
  {2: 1.0}
  ```

- When displaying or interpreting a list of bits (or qubits) as a string, bit
  $n$ is the leftmost bit, and bit $0$ is the rightmost bit. This is because we
  usually write numbers with the most significant digit on the left, and in
  Qiskit, bit $n$ is interpreted as the most significant bit.

  For example, the following cell defines a `Statevector` from a string of
  single-qubit states. In this case, qubit $0$ is in state $|0\rangle$, and
  qubit $1$ in state $|{+}\rangle$.

  ```python
  from qiskit.quantum_info import Statevector
  sv = Statevector.from_label("0+")
  sv.probabilities_dict()
  ```

  ```
  {'00': 0.4999999999999999, '01': 0.4999999999999999}
  ```

  This occasionally causes confusion when interpreting a string of bits, as you
  might expect the leftmost bit to be bit $0$, whereas it usually represents bit
  $n$.

> - When representing a state vector as a list of complex numbers (amplitudes),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When representing a statevector as a list of complex numbers (amplitudes),
```

  Qiskit orders these amplitudes such that the amplitude at index $x$ represents
  the computational basis state $|x\rangle$.

  ```python
  print(sv[1])  # amplitude of state |01>
  print(sv[2])  # amplitude of state |10>
  ```

  ```
  (0.7071067811865475+0j)
  0j
  ```

- Each gate in Qiskit can interpret a list of qubits in its own way, but
  controlled gates usually follow the convention `(control, target)`.

  For example, the following cell adds a controlled-X gate where qubit $0$ is
  the control and qubit $1$ is the target.

  ```python
  from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
  qc = QuantumCircuit(2)
  qc.cx(0, 1)
  qc.draw()
  ```

  ```
  q_0: ──■──
       ┌─┴─┐
  q_1: ┤ X ├
       └───┘
  ```

> ### Changing ordering in Qiskit

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Change ordering in Qiskit
```
